Nextflow tutorial updates (#2267)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/support/tutorials/nextflow-puhti.md

when needed.

Here is a batch script for running a [nf-core pipeline](https://nf-co.re/pipelines) on Puhti:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=nextflowjob
#SBATCH --account=<project>
#SBATCH --partition=small
#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=40
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=2G
  
module load hyperqueue/0.16.0
module load nextflow/22.10.1

# create a directory on scratch folder for running nextflow pipeline
export SCRATCH=/scratch/<project>/$USER/nextflow
mkdir -p ${SCRATCH}
cd ${SCRATCH}

export APPTAINER_TMPDIR="${SCRATCH}"
export APPTAINER_CACHEDIR="${SCRATCH}"
unset XDG_RUNTIME_DIR

# Specify a location for the HyperQueue server
export HQ_SERVER_DIR=${PWD}/hq-server-${SLURM_JOB_ID}
mkdir -p "${HQ_SERVER_DIR}"

# Start the server in the background (&) and wait until it has started
hq server start &
until hq job list &>/dev/null ; do sleep 1 ; done

# Start the workers in the background and wait for them to start
srun --overlap --cpu-bind=none --mpi=none hq worker start --cpus=${SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK} &
hq worker wait "${SLURM_NTASKS}"

# As an example, let's clone a nf-core pipeline and run a test sample

> git clone https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq.git -b 3.10
> cd rnaseq
> nextflow run main.nf -profile test,singularity --outdir . -resume

Reviewer: As a suggestion, would this make sense to include to make the example batch script work more out-of-the-box?
```suggestion
cd rnaseq

# Ensure Nextflow uses the right executor and knows how much it can submit
echo "executor {
  queueSize = $(( 40*SLURM_NNODES ))
  name = 'hq'
  cpus = $(( 40*SLURM_NNODES ))
}" >> nextflow.config

nextflow run main.nf -profile test,singularity --outdir . -resume
```

Author: The suggested change would work here. Please add git module and increase runtime to be half an hour or even more (sometimes, pulling images would take more time than usual)

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) is a scalable and reproducible scientific
workflow management system that interacts with containerized applications to
perform compute-intensive tasks. Nextflow provides built-in support for
HPC-friendly containers such as Apptainer and Singularity. Although Nextflow
pipelines allow us to choose Docker engine as an executor for running
pipelines, please note that Docker containers can't be used on Puhti due to the
lack of administrative privileges for regular users.

## Strengths of Nextflow

* Easy installation
* Supports implicit parallelism
* Can handle complex dependencies and conditional execution
* Handles error recovery

## Disadvantages of Nextflow

* Has limited MPI support
* Creates a lot of job steps and excessive I/O load
* Does not efficiently integrate with Slurm

## Use Apptainer/Singularity containers with Nextflow

Containers can be smoothly integrated with Nextflow pipelines. No additional
modifications to Nextflow scripts are needed except enabling the Singularity
engine (instead of Docker) in the Nextflow configuration file in the HPC
environment. Nextflow is able to pull remote container images stored in

> Singularity or Docker Hub registry. The remote container images are usually

Reviewer: Should it be singularity or apptainer?

Author: As this is general description, we can mention both alternatives (Singularity and Apptainer).

nextflow run /scratch/<project>/What_the_Phage/phage.nf --help
```

or pull the Nextflow pipeline from Docker Hub:

```bash
nextflow run replikation/What_the_Phage -r v0.8.0 --help
```

In either case, pay attention to the versions of different
Singularity/Apptainer containers as mentioned in `containers.config` file.

### 6.2 Bring your WtP Apptainer images to Puhti

WtP is a multi-container pipeline requiring as many as 21 container images
([more details here](https://github.com/replikation/What_the_Phage/blob/master/configs/container.config))
at the time of writing this tutorial. All these containers were downloaded
to a cPouta environment to avoid any build failures of container images on
Puhti due to the lack of root privileges for users. For the sake of this
tutorial, the downloaded container images were then uploaded to
[Allas](../../data/Allas/introduction.md) which is an object storage
environment at CSC.

The images in Allas object storage can be downloaded to your project scratch as
below:

```bash
mkdir -p /scratch/<project>/What_the_Phage/singularity
cd /scratch/<project>/What_the_Phage/singularity
wget https://a3s.fi/puhti_singularity/WtP_singularity.tar.gz

> tar -xavf WtP_singularity.tar.gz

Reviewer: Should it be singularity or apptainer?

Author: singularity

```

### 6.3 Run WtP pipelines as a batch job on Puhti

Submit the following batch script to run the Nextflow pipeline:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --time=01:00:00
#SBATCH --partition=small
#SBATCH --account=<project>
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=4

export TMPDIR=${PWD}
export SCRATCH=/scratch/<project>/What_the_Phage

# Activate Nextflow on Puhti
module load nextflow/21.10.6 

# Nextflow command here
nextflow run ${SCRATCH}/phage.nf \
         --fasta ${SCRATCH}/test-data/OX2_draft.fa \
         --cores 4 \
         --output results \
         --profile local,singularity \

>          --cachedir ${SCRATCH}/singularity \

Reviewer: Should it be singularity or apptainer?

Author: for this pipeline and version, it is "singularity"

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=nextflowjob
#SBATCH --account=<project>
#SBATCH --partition=small
#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=40
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=2G
  
module load hyperqueue/0.16.0
module load nextflow/22.10.1

# create a directory on scratch folder for running nextflow pipeline
export SCRATCH=/scratch/<project>/$USER/nextflow
mkdir -p ${SCRATCH}
cd ${SCRATCH}

export APPTAINER_TMPDIR="${SCRATCH}"
export APPTAINER_CACHEDIR="${SCRATCH}"
unset XDG_RUNTIME_DIR

# Specify a location for the HyperQueue server
export HQ_SERVER_DIR=${PWD}/hq-server-${SLURM_JOB_ID}
mkdir -p "${HQ_SERVER_DIR}"

# Start the server in the background (&) and wait until it has started
hq server start &
until hq job list &>/dev/null ; do sleep 1 ; done

# Start the workers in the background and wait for them to start
srun --overlap --cpu-bind=none --mpi=none hq worker start --cpus=${SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK} &
hq worker wait "${SLURM_NTASKS}"

# As an example, let's clone a nf-core pipeline and run a test sample
git clone https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq.git -b 3.10
cd rnaseq

> nextflow run main.nf -profile test,singularity --outdir . -resume

Reviewer: Should it be singularity or apptainer?

Author: for this one, it is "singularity".  In general, most nextflow pipelines still use singularity terminology. And also depends on the version of pipeline. Latest pipelines are slowly catching up with Apptainer terminology. I would use Apptainer and singularity interchangeably in the general description of Nextflow at least for now.

# Wait for all jobs to finish, then shut down the workers and server
hq job wait all
hq worker stop all
hq server stop
```

!!! note
     In case you are using multiple nodes, ensure that you use the right
     executor and that the executor knows how many jobs it can submit. For
     this, below is an example snippet that one should add to the
     `nextflow.config` file:

     ```text
     executor {
     queueSize = 40*SLURM_NNODES
     name = 'hq'
     cpus = 40*SLURM_NNODES
     }

>      ```

Reviewer: Would it be best to add this to the batch script similar to how it is done in the other HyperQueue example? As far as I understand, without it the above batch script won't actually use HyperQueue as executor by default?

Reviewer: I added a suggestion related to this. Regardless of how we do it, I think the steps needed should be made more explicit somehow, since the batch script does not automatically use HQ (and it also seems to timeout). I think it may be useful for someone who already understands a bit how Nextflow works and is able to edit the batch script, but perhaps not a complete beginner?

Author: Yes. I agree.
